It bears mentioning that this syntax
is something useful to know about.
Anybody know what this is called,
or what this is an instance of,
or a couple instances of, actually?
There's a term for it in JavaScript.
It has an acronym.
>> Iife.
>> It is called an iife, or an I-I-F-E,
an immediately invoked
function expression.
So the syntax is, essentially,
instead of declaring this function,
essentially with a function expression,
a function keyword, or
it could also be an arrow function.
Then using that name to invoke
it later at some other point, so
not immediately,
we have a function expression
that's evaluated to the function
itself with the parens and
then called or invoked right away.
So immediately invoked
function expression.
And there's a couple of
cases where you might need
to use this, for example, async and await.
Await is something that you,
in some contexts
in JavaScript,
do not have global access to.
There's more to be said about that,
guess where you can go to
find out all the details?
>> Our good friend.
>> Our good friend, MDN, exactly.
But, for example,
if you need to await something but
you don't have access
to the await keyword,
you can put things in
an immediately invoked asynchronous
function to essentially
accomplish the same thing as,
Top level awaiting a fetch or
what have you.
So this is all to say,
this syntax, as unintuitive
as it might seem,
is gonna crop up once in a while.
So now you know a fancy jargony term,
if you didn't already.
Yeah?
>> Do you have to name a function
that you define in that way?
>> You do not.
>> Yeah, and I don't imagine you
can get to it any other way.
There's no way to get to
it by that name later?
>> Essentially,
if all this function does is get invoked,
right, just once, then yeah,
there's absolutely no reason to name it.
There's no reason to
have a reference to it.
There's no reason to what have you.
>> It'll go out of scope.
>> And yes, exactly,
so let's double check.
But let's go, when in doubt,
to the console.
Okay, so I invoked it, I got one thing.
Now, bling is not defined,
reference error, because,
exactly, this was within its
own little world [LAUGH].
And not, if I had done this this way,
essentially what
that told JavaScript to do
is create a variable called
bling in the global scope
that points to this function.
So when I run that function, or when I
tell JavaScript this function expression,
and I give JavaScript this command,
as it were.
Remember this value, it's a function,
call it bling,
I wanna be able to find it later.
JavaScript's like, cool,
got you, that function keyword.
Yeah, that tells me in my syntax that I'm
gonna set this up in the global scope.
But when we put these parens around it,
and
this could be an arrow function as well.
In which case it's even more obvious that
we don't have to name it because we're
not gonna do a const assignment here,
it's not allowed.
So what we're going to get is, and yeah,
this is not purely functional,
but that's a whole other problem.
So what we're going to get is essentially
not a reference to a function,
but the function itself.
So we have no reference to it,
it's just a value.
And we can see that little preview down
there that we've got a function line.
Sorry, it's a function that
takes an argument line.
But this is just a value, not a named
value like with our function expression.
And that's fine cuz all we wanted
to do was call it, like this.
Same as we would call any function,
because we got that value with
the parens that said, hey, JavaScript,
go evaluate this chunk of code.
Might have been a variable,
might have been some other thing.
[LAUGH] A little Easter egg on the,
yeah, go looking for those funny memes.
Anyway, via the value inside of it,
JavaScript doesn't care about
how you got to it anymore,
all it knows is it has a value.
And it can now do whatever you tell it
to do only as long as it knows about
that value, which is only,
in this case, within those parens.
Okay, so this is all a little
philosophical and whatever, but this,
as I said, is a syntax that can be very
confusing when you first run into it.
But does crop up in production
JavaScript sometimes because there
are certain intricacies [LAUGH]
of the language that don't allow
certain things at the global scope.
So by scoping ourselves
out a new little world,
we can get around some
things with these iifes.
So this is all to say,
JavaScript support's doing
the same thing lots of different ways.
Another way we can refer to that
is it's a multi-paradigm language.
So to keep with our theme of memes,
the meme theme, if you will.
The handshake is like yeah,
object-oriented programming,
functional programming,
what do they have in common?
JavaScript, and
a whole bunch of other stuff, but
that's [LAUGH] beside the point.
So this is not a programming
paradigms course,
although I do love talking
about programming paradigms.
This is not a functional programming or
even a specifically object-oriented
programming course.
But this is all to say that one of
the things I think that makes life in
the JavaScript universe,
I was gonna say difficult, but
maybe I just wanted to, richer and
more complex and interesting.
[LAUGH] Is that there are lots of
different ways to do similar things, and
there are lots of extremely
different ways to conceive of doing
different things in JavaScript.
JavaScript supports all
kinds of different, well,
especially these two different paradigms,
and so the code you'll find out there
might look totally different from
the code you're used to writing.
And it helps to know that both
of these are kind of possible.
This is all to say, what do you think,
does JavaScript pick a side, objects or
functions?
>> I mean, you said everything
in JavaScripts and objects.
So I'd like to say object.
[LAUGH]
>> [LAUGH] What does co-pilot think?
No, just kidding.
[LAUGH]
>> [LAUGH]
>> And indeed, yeah,
as you might have seen in a little
preview Easter egg when we were talking
about the heap earlier,
it was all full of objects.
And yeah,
that function value that came back,
[SOUND] that's an object
that's under the hood.
No matter what we look at in JavaScript,
if we pull its mask off,
because we're meddling kids,
we'll find an object.
They're all different objects,
but in JavaScript,
pretty much all data is
thought of as an object.
And that brings us to
the OOP side of the coin.
And yeah, speaking of accessibility,
this isn't the best on this GIF here, but
in other words, life is a prototype
in JavaScript, it's true.
Kind of everything comes
down to prototypes.
I just wanna check if we need a break for
anything, or if anybody has questions?
Also on the interwebs, yeah?
>> Just a quick question
about the paradigm styles.
Which style would be preferred when we
would write a pure function, functional or
object-oriented?
>> So kind of the concept of
pure functions is a big deal in
functional programming, which if you
are interested in programming paradigms,
I do have another course about
functional programming specifically.
But suffice it to say that in JavaScript,
we're not usually doing the purest stuff.
Now, what do I mean when I'm
talking about pure functions?
Well, a pure function is something that,
first of all,
does absolutely nothing else in
the world than return a value.
No logging to the console,
no setting no timeouts,
no none of this fetching data
from the outside world and
then posting to some other API, whatever.
None of that, all a peer function
can do is return a value.
And, to make matters
even more constrained,
all it can do to compute that value is
look at the arguments that it gets.
So that means,
every time it gets the same arguments,
it doesn't matter what the weather is,
what date.now says it is,
whether somebody's user agent has
a problem with its dependent, whatever.
None of that matters,
it's always going to return the same
value if you give it the same inputs.
In other word, it's deterministic.
So when we're talking about
functions in JavaScript,
for example,
this function that we just looked at here,
Or this one even, which I [LAUGH]
put the label functional programming
on this slide, and
the functional programmers among us will
be like [SOUND] horrified because
this is not a pure function,
if we're using this to do something that
logs to the console or what have you.
But that's why in this version we're using
console log, and in this version we're
just returning a string, which if we're
entering this code in the console,
we get the string out either way,
so it's all good.
But in JavaScript we're often writing
functions with the function keyword or
the arrow syntax that do stuff
other than return things.
Sometimes we don't even have the return
keyword because we're not trying to return
anything, we're just trying to execute a
bunch of instructions one after the other,
do some imperative stuff.
And those are all side effects, so
then we're now not in the realm
of functional programming.
So if you wanna learn more about
that stuff, there are resources,
you can check out my other
Frontend Masters courses,
which have links to a whole
bunch of other resources.
But in general, to go back to the
question, if we're trying to write a pure
function in JavaScript, we would be
in the functional programming world.
And even sometimes in what's called
functional programming, like this
little bling guy here that's logging
into the console, not a peer function.
So we can have functional-ish
programming in JavaScript and
sometimes call it functional programming.